# CD TG Physical Meeting (day 1) 10/09/2019 10:30-18:00 UTC

## Present at meeting

### In person

* Wouter Addink (Naturalis Biodiversity Center / SYNTHESYS+ JRA1 / DiSSCo)  
* Hillary Goodson (Natural History Museum London / DiSSCo-UK)  
* Quentin Groom (Meise Botanic Garden / TDWG / SYNTHESYS+ NA4)  
* Morten Høfft (GBIF)  
* Dave Martin (Atlas of Living Australia)  
* Nicky Nicolson (Royal Botanical Gardens Kew)  
* Deb Paul (iDigBio)  
* Niels Raes (Naturalis Biodiversity Center / NLBIG / DiSSCo-NL)  
* Tim Robertson (GBIF / SYNTHESYS+ NA5)  
* Dave Smith (Natural History Museum London)  
* Laura Tilley (CETAF / SYNTHESYS+ NA2)  
* Maarten Trekels (Meise Botanic Garden)  
* Sarah Vincent (Natural History Museum London)  
* Matt Woodburn (Natural History Museum London)

### Joined remotely for the end-of-day wrap-up

* Stan Blum (California Academy of Sciences / TDWG)
* Sharon Grant (Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago)
* Janeen Jones (Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago)
* William Ulate (Missouri Botanical Garden / TDWG)
* Kate Webbink (Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago)

## Handy meeting links and references

* London meeting Google Drive folder: [https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1DzRIpNllQk19cTPbASdkDooiKmac-IcX](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1DzRIpNllQk19cTPbASdkDooiKmac-IcX)
* Agenda: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1AQDA-Yq9A5NQ4zs83z5m2GEtjZJ5d1CME86m0NcLCIc/edit#heading=h.3mpc5q4s5xsm](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1AQDA-Yq9A5NQ4zs83z5m2GEtjZJ5d1CME86m0NcLCIc/edit#heading=h.3mpc5q4s5xsm)
* CD TG - Dimensions Definitions [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1-uS6OBjr7vncOxCN9vnYAp9Hbtjp7BO1sfsX4R_8lVw/edit#gid=968549916](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1-uS6OBjr7vncOxCN9vnYAp9Hbtjp7BO1sfsX4R_8lVw/edit#gid=968549916)

### Group information

* Github repository: [https://github.com/tdwg/cd](https://github.com/tdwg/cd)
* Task Group charter: [https://github.com/tdwg/cd/blob/master/charters/task_group_charter/tg_charter.md](https://github.com/tdwg/cd/blob/master/charters/task_group_charter/tg_charter.md)

### Work tracking

* TG tasks (Github issues): [https://github.com/tdwg/cd/issues](https://github.com/tdwg/cd/issues)
* Project work packages (Github projects): [https://github.com/tdwg/cd/projects](https://github.com/tdwg/cd/projects)

### Group documents

* Data model discussion document: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KPOJM0WnZGyXCP--k-IKHiPpXIBZNHV6Ifob9DuuG3g](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KPOJM0WnZGyXCP--k-IKHiPpXIBZNHV6Ifob9DuuG3g)
* Join the Dots reference documents: [https://drive.google.com/open?id=1ESRuw98URLzHUf86FIAIk6m5-17csmux](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1ESRuw98URLzHUf86FIAIk6m5-17csmux)
* Concept of operations: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1i7BI_HI27iDw4eIlUPP7jEZIv3XPQU8xb53zTNfiwsM](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1i7BI_HI27iDw4eIlUPP7jEZIv3XPQU8xb53zTNfiwsM)

### Data model documents

* Data definitions doc: [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1-uS6OBjr7vncOxCN9vnYAp9Hbtjp7BO1sfsX4R_8lVw](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1-uS6OBjr7vncOxCN9vnYAp9Hbtjp7BO1sfsX4R_8lVw)

### Reference

* [https://hangingtogether.org/?p=477](https://hangingtogether.org/?p=477)
* [https://www.gbif.org/grscicoll](https://www.gbif.org/grscicoll)
* [https://www.researchgate.net/figure/References-to-specimens-in-an-article-begin-with-an-institutionCode-that-identifies-the_fig1_307084791](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/References-to-specimens-in-an-article-begin-with-an-institutionCode-that-identifies-the_fig1_307084791)
* [https://discourse.gbif.org/t/collections-catalogue-grbio/688/11](https://discourse.gbif.org/t/collections-catalogue-grbio/688/11)
* [https://zenodo.org/record/1285615#.XXbKgWZ7mj4](https://zenodo.org/record/1285615#.XXbKgWZ7mj4)
* [https://community.canadensys.net/wp-content/uploads/montreal-2009-bci.pdf](https://community.canadensys.net/wp-content/uploads/montreal-2009-bci.pdf)
* [http://www.hyam.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/report_02.pdf](http://www.hyam.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/report_02.pdf)
* [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5018115/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5018115/)
* [https://discourse.gbif.org/t/collections-catalogue-grbio/688/26](https://discourse.gbif.org/t/collections-catalogue-grbio/688/26)

Geological Portals & Informatics:

* EarthChem: [http://ecp.iedadata.org/search.php?pkey=522834&glossary_pkey=](http://ecp.iedadata.org/search.php?pkey=522834&glossary_pkey=)
* PalaeoDatabase: [https://paleobiodb.org/#/](https://paleobiodb.org/#/)
* ES Cyberinformatics: [https://www.earthcube.org/info/about](https://www.earthcube.org/info/about)

## Meeting notes

### Session 1: Scene setting and vision

Goal of the meeting: to progress data model and standards from TDWG Group
* Deeper discussion and more technical input into data model concepts, definitions and challenges 
* Identifying existing terms and ontologies

#### Lessons learned from GRBio/GRSciColl and BCI (Deb Paul)

* Slides available at https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1fFrjiPdgCJBCNXSH5KTQ9qJjLRmTB89bmc3peHZVYxw
* Different niches - from whole ecosystem to particular views
* Prioritization incentive - an issue; also leverage for changing policies and institutional take up of this 
* Separate standard from database; web interface - keep standards simple and strategic 
* BCI - possibly too much effort diverted to organisational model rather than core collections modelling
* Prioritize stakeholders to inform standards?
* Impact needs to be shown (beyond publication data)

#### Future development of GRBio and GRSciColl (Tim Robertson)

* Need to link different types of occurrence records - on roadmap for more expressive and comprehensive data model: focus on citation
* Recognized: Long time to adapt this
* Two stream strategy: how to deal with existing citation records; new models for future citation records
* Use clustering techniques to extract and infer physical specimens and identify sequences and citations; from the occurrence records (based on PhD work by Nicky Nicolson)
* Citation tracking: purpose is to demonstrate/measure impact of specimens/collections 
* Identification with ORCIDs and then claim specimens a researcher has collected/identified/etc - incorporating work David Shorthouse has done on Bloodhound (https://bloodhound-tracker.net/) 
* GRSciColl - data rescue; extracted and migrated to GBIF (read only at first) - editing capabilities have been folded in. Next step: controlled vocabulary 
* Management interface: https://registry.gbif.org 
* Running national portals (ie for Canada, 2020)
* Thinking about how to compel people to give metadata - clickable wireframes
* Discovery Virtual Natural History Collections ‘portal’ (non-GBIF branded)
    * Low fidelity: https://sketch.cloud/s/9RJ8Q/a/9LOzYp/play 
    * High fidelity: https://sketch.cloud/s/3lJ7D/a/P5ARYd/play
* CD data flows: local CMS to global aggregators (and IH, etc).
* Need new identifier for collections (?!) to showcase good services ie partnership with Datacite to do data tracking (using ORCID, establishing RoIls) - graph of linkages between occurrences and publications/people/citations is the benefit here
* Focus on DOIs and promoting DOIs (Not decision, just proposal) 
* Need to accommodate variety of standards
* Governance issues: Where does this data get edited? Who has permission? 
* GBIF - needs to work more closely with CMS’ - ideal: update my GRSciColl  record using native tools

#### Group discussion

* _Wouter Addink_: needs to be more thought out (and potential repercussions) ie DiSSCo - seeks to put data management at the responsibility of Musea; within an understood framework
* Editing: the responsibility of the institutions
* _Deb Paul_: DOI - versioning and how to track it - a complexity that needs thought
* Future: Collection metadata description within institutions to be exposed; facilitate automated update
* _Dave Smith_: there is some provision for this; but it is not standard (nor is it  standardized - e.g., EMu ‘Narratives’ module) 
* This (potential) provision could be used to more effectively drive Digitization on Demand - this would be useful for smaller institutions

#### Future iDigBio US Collections vision

* US members to go to GBIF to keep records up to data; iDigBio pulls from there
* One place to update!

#### Future ELViS (European Loans and Visits System) vision

* Main objective: to support transnational and virtual access calls. After this, plans for wider use to become long-standing service
* Universal loans and visits system
* Pilot for design ideas ie implementation of ORCIDs (for people)
* Some collections discovery also to be embedded in ELViS 
* CSIC (maybe this http://www.mncn.csic.es/seccion=1196&idioma=en_GB)
* No overlap in collections data
* ISNI, RoR, GRID potential for institutional identifiers
* CETAF passports may open up for all European institutions
* Track digitization progress, loan numbers
* Reporting options - on uses of ELVis, number of publications, ...
* Using GUIDs for collections in GRSciColl (URLs)

#### Future CETAF vision
* Progress on CETAF Registries demonstrated by Laura Tilley (https://collections.naturalscience.be/cpb/nh-collections/taxonomy/taxonomy#c0=all&b_start=0)
* RBINS (Patrick Semall) is leading on the development

#### Relationships with existing projects

* Index Herbariorum: One time synchronisation with GRSciColl 6 yrs ago. GBIF in touch regarding a 2020 GBIF WP task to build a synchronisation mechanism
* Ongoing coversations about incentivising data contributors
* See [CD Conceptual Architecture (for conversation)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1RRfRysyxiw8bN9TkAV6HrWdlTPsck8LZ/view)

### Session 2: Collection Descriptions data model

#### Refresher on CD data model fundamentals (Matt Woodburn)

* Slides available [here](meeting_resources/cds_summary_2019-09-10.pptx)
* Hierarchy is handled within the dimensions
* Metrics hang off collection description, rather than hierarchy/taxonomy/other dimensions
* Defining multiple CD schemes
    * Requires definition of agreed rules for shared schema - which dimensions are used, level of granularity, etc.
    * CD scheme rules would prevent double counting - a query shouldn’t aggregate counts/metrics from different schema
* Controlled vocabularies (materialType, storageClass...)
    * Dimensional model requires more initial effort and controlled vocabularies, but it gives you greater flexibility to slice the data to answer different questions.
    * The more dimensions added to a single CD scheme, the more collection records you’d require/the more schemas you’d need(?).
* Linking to specimen/occurrence records (explicitly and by inference)
    * Fuzzy matching against CMS specimen-level data using e.g., location and taxonomy

#### Group discussion

* _Quentin Groom_: As specimen-level digitisation increases and more specimen records are in the CMS, at what point do you switch to using metrics derived from CMS records, rather than schema?
* _Morten Høfft_: Might be impossible to compare two schema on a like-for-like basis, any idea of minimum metadata fields required for CD record to facilitate some level of comparison?
* _Deb Paul_: www.fishfindR.net indicates overlap within a query - similar type of challenge?
    * FishfindR is digitized fish records only (no backlog, no undigitized information)
    * Meant to met researchers discovery needs right now
    * Allows you to compare fish collections to see for example, what’s unique about your fish collection, OR which fish collections have specimens from a given taxa.
* Discussion around issues of estimating metrics (e.g., counts)
    * _Nicky Nicolson_: Could use way GBIF downloads are framed/defined to infer how users want their data sliced? _Tim Roberton_: Mainly people, species, place.
    * _Tim Robertson_: can you attached metrics for different taxonomies within a CD record? _Matt Woodburn_: Mechanism needs defining: essentially, would need to link/encapsulate different CD records to the umbrella/higher record, but more thought required on how metric aggregation would be handled within such a model.

#### Suggestions for moving forward on the model and standard

* Which part of the data model to tackle first?
* _Wouter Addink_: Identify which fields/schema would link into DiSSCo/SYNTH+ & similar projects?
* _Deb Paul_: Anything similar/analogous from other sectors? E.g., libraries or archives
* _Tim Robertson_: What’s the end goal/what would CD group be asking TDWG to ratify at the end of this?
* _Matt Woodburn_: schema, recommendations on how to maintain the data integrity, data protocols etc. Set of initial dimensions (highest priority/widest use) and widen out when advice on extensibility is mature + available.
* _Tim Robertson_: standard will probably be logical model, dimensions, template for defining future dimensions.
* _Quentin Groom_: can we have a version 1 in a year?
* _Tim Robertson_: How important is it (CD) to be ratified by TDWG
* _Wouter Addink_: DiSSCo will use it
* _Quentin Groom_: But TDWG does need it, as does SYNTHESYS+ NA4. We do need it, and we do have funding.
* _Matt Woodburn_: let’s try to get to Version 1... to put out for consideration and scope checking. Use cases are getting quite complex. (people + metrics, relationships between different schemes). Prototype a straightforward dimensional model.
* _Quentin Groom_: Next meetings for this topic > the next one is Leiden at Biodiversity_Next > have a version for their consideration and review...
* _Tim Robertson_: Work towards a logical Model with template for how you do dimensions
* V1 of Dimensions - profiles of different communities
* _Tim Robertson_: look at the logical model - to evaluate how tools could be built that would capture data to the proposed V1 model. 
* _Matt Woodburn_: Would be a good early test of how good the data model is.

### Session 3: Breakout groups

#### Group 1: Continued work on the data model

* Work continued on defining classes and terms in the draft specification in Google Sheets
* Questions regarding scope:
    * Provenance: tracking who is doing what tasks, and time taken
    * People and expertise: not part of the current scope, conversation parked to be discussed in future with the wider group

#### Group 2: Alignment and workflows for collection descriptions

